Evening Program, Eve of Shri Hamsa Swamini Puja
Germany 9-7-1988
After this grand manifestation
of beautiful notes
into such a beautiful woven melody,
with all the permutations and combinations that are possible.
It's hard to say anything any  more about it.
I didn't know that such a great artist was there,
I never heard him before.
It's My luck today that I've been able to hear him
and such a great artist on table.
Is thanks to you that I could hear all this,
they never get a chance to listen to such divine music.
Is so beautiful and the ripples after ripples
you could see how it was moving.
I'm sorry I had to stop you from clapping, because
that would have disturbed the ripples a little bit, I thought.
But still it is to be understood that,
indian music comes from the source which we call as OM.
Is a divine source and all made congenial
to the tuning of the Spirit.
Because of that you all are feeling that joy within yourself.
This joy that is created within yourdelf,
maybe, that many musicians may not feel it.
If they haven't felt their Spirit.
Is for the saints to listen to this music.
And for this great artists I am creating saints here,
that they should appreciate
this great music of india.
Moreover I don't know how many of you have visited Kashmir,
but the valleys of Kashmir,
and the river Ganges flowing in it,
as if, such a combination I have felt.
As if the river Ganges was flowing
in the Kashmir valleys,
with all it's ripples and beauties the vibrations spreading.
But the poetry fails, the words fail.
The joy is so boundless and beautyful,
is the expression of an artist,
but in thoughtless awareness, in that Nirvichara Samadhi,
you can enjoy it so much better.
I was happy when the music went on
during the time when there was not light.
But I know all of you were hearing it
through your Saharara, isn't it true? Yes Shri Mataji.
And I'm happy that the artist didn't get disturbed,
he went on playing.
That's the best thing that can happen to us
that we hear all these things trough our Sahasrara.
So that
the manifestation of that music
is heard at a level,
when you are on a very deep understanding.
When you are very receptive.
All this acts to our joy
but also to our ascent.
And may God bless all these artists,
all of them, from My heart I bless them.
So that they should prosper more and more.
[HINDI]
It is a very very special type of a instrument, I think.
Is a very collective instrument,
it has got hundred strings in it.
But see the way the artist was playing,
with different rhythms in both the hands.
See, on one side if it was fast the another side it was slow.
Sometimes, if you have noticed, he used to go off beat
with one side, with the another side he was keeping the beat.
It's a very beautiful rendering
and extremely well balanced expression of a melody.
I think there are no words to explain,
how people are so dedicated to music in india.
And with what concentration they learn it.
And the alertness was so evident.
The best part was the report between the tabla and the santoor,
was so beautiful,
so complementry, absolutely balanced.
And we really have to thank them very much,
to come all the way to this place
and to give you such beautiful music.
I don't think I could have done that in London so much better.
May God bless you.
[Applause]
[Musician] Well Shri Mataji said so many things.
She told,
She said about us that we are [...]
But I feel still we are just very small flies on there.
We have a [...] some
lot more in in the life and in music.
God is great, my gurus they are great.
And well, i don't know what i can to say more.
Well, i think you understand what i mean.
[Applause]
Well it's really a very very
deep happiness and pleasure for us
to play all the time for all of you.
Because we all we can go with the music and we can reach
in, in the very God, to the God I mean.
I think you like to listen till more, isn't it?
[Shri Mataji] [Hindi]
So i will take some time to tune the instrument.
So we all can tune together with the instrument.
And then i will continue.
[Shri Mataji HINDI]
Now this raag which i'm going to play
is a very beautiful raag.
All the raags they are beautiful.
But this is more beautiful, because generally in India
we play this raag at the end of the concert.
[Shri Mataji HINDI] Bhairavi.
Well, now you know that.
So because of that it's very beautiful raag.
And you know also the mood of the raag.
So i shall play short alaap
and then both the compositions
in rhythmic cycle of 16 beats.
I want to, i would like to tell you one small little thing,
because it's very unusual here in Europe to tune the instrument.
at the stage, sitting on the stage.
But our big gurus they say,
when you tune the instrument on the stage that means,
we all we are tuning our hearts together.
So when the instrument is tuned properly, so i'm tuned properly,
and when i'm tuned properly, we all are tuned properly.
So that's it.
Well, i will play now, thank you.
[Applause] Raag bhairavi.
End of  Raag bhairavi. [Applause]
[Shri Mataji] talking to/with the musicians [Mix Hindi/English]
May God bless you. May God bless you all.
[Shri Mataji leaving talking Hindi]